---
layout: post
title:  "Taping Git Hooks Superpowers"
date:   2015-05-12
categories: code
author: "Oscar"
---

[Git hooks](http://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Hooks) can be a very helpful tool in the development process. Using them will enable you to tap some of the superhero powers of bash in combination with Git. These are custom scripts that run when important actions occur.

The hooks can be categorized as *client side* and *server side*. Client side hooks are triggered by committing and merging. A fun example for a usage scenario could be to take a picture using the webcam on every commit. Server side hooks are triggered from network operations such as receiving pushed commits. This means that if you are an administrator you could set up a push policy which could reject pushes. Another use-case would be to start a server when receiving a push. This is what we did.

For our current project we have a Node.js server for development and test purposes running on a Raspberry Pi. The same Pi also holds the Git repository. Upon receiving a new push to the master branch containing a new feature, we can automate the deployment. It is pretty cool and makes deploying much easier and spares us quite some time and hassle. We use the *post-receive* hook. This hook is first called after the whole git process is completed before ending.

## The procedure in short
Firstly, set up a bare repository on your Raspberry Pi:

{% highlight bash %}
$ mkdir repos/myapp.git && cd repos/myapp.git
$ git init --bare
{% endhighlight %}

The ```--bare``` flag implies that the repository will not contain a working directory.

In the repository that was just created there is a folder named hooks/. Inside this folder is where the hook files will be placed.

{% highlight bash %}
$ cd hooks && touch post-recieve
$ sudo nano post-recieve
{% endhighlight %}

Here is where we write our bash script. In my case I will checkout the code and place it in the deploy directory. Using the npm package [forever](https://www.npmjs.com/package/forever) I will stop the currently running server, install new npm dependencies and run my build process. The last step in this process will start the app and keep it running.. FOREVER! Or, until I push my next feature. You will also notice that these commands are within an IF statement. I only want to deploy when pushing to the master branch. When developing, I use feature branches and commit quite often and I don't want to deploy features that are not complete.

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/bash
DEPLOYDIR=/home/pi/deploy-dir

while read oldrev newrev ref
do
    if [[ $ref =~ .*/master$ ]];
    then
        echo "Master ref received.  Deploying master branch to production..."

        # Checkout the code to the deployment directory
        git --work-tree="$DEPLOYDIR" --git-dir=/home/pi/repos/myapp.git checkout -f

        cd "$DEPLOYDIR"

        forever stop server/index.js

        # Install any new dependencies that might have been added
        npm install

        # Prepare my scripts for deployment
        npm run build

        forever start server/index.js

        echo "Master branch successfully deployd. Yay!"
    else
        echo "Ref $ref successfully received.  Doing nothing: only the master branch may be deployed on this server."
    fi
done
{% endhighlight %}

So the last words. Git hooks can be very useful and is very simple to setup. It is little work for quite a lot of satisfaction. At least it was for me when I was getting our service up for development. I hope this may serve as help to anyone other wanting to get started with basic Git hooks. Thanks for reading!
