---
layout: post
title:  "Welcome to Jekyll!"
date:   2015-04-14 13:03:09
categories: game design
author: "Christian"
---
The concept of elsewhere, described in the quote above, is probably something most people that are into games can relate to as a way of describing that special feeling that emerges when entering the domain of a fictional realm, not adherent to the rigid structures and impenetrable laws of our everyday lives, but solely constructed out of imagination and a will to escape the unbending shackles of reality. It is a place we venture into, by using advanced computers and gaming stations. These devices function as portals, teleporting us to elsewhere. They are immersive, which means they have the ability to represent fictional worlds so believable they make us feel that there is in fact here. The elsewhere that they create is often portrayed as totally separate from our reality, with well defined boundaries of where it ends and real life begins. This is most often considered the premises of a fictional world: it exists within the defined space wherein it is created. But there are fictional worlds that are not confined to the digital borders of computers or social rules of tabletop games, that don’t obey the structural frame of play. These are the fictional worlds of alternate reality games (ARGs). 
  ARGs are pervasive in that they are set in the real world and use all of its aspects to create gameplay. In opposite of traditional games, which often have thoroughly defined borders and structures, ARGs defile the notion of predetermined instances and rudimentary goals by introducing the intersecting space of reality into the mix. They do incorporate fictional worlds, but layer these on top of reality, creating a duality for its players to explore. According to Juul (2005), all fictional worlds are incomplete, in the sense that no matter how they came to exist, they were designed, and therefore can never be finished. The fact that fictional worlds are incomplete open them up for subjective interpretation, but it also means that they can be further extrapolated by others than their original creator. This plays an imperative role in ARGs, as this type of games draw upon its player’s own ability to perceive their surroundings and incorporate the game elements into it.
