---
layout: post
title:  "Git Hooks"
date:   2015-05-09
categories: code
author: "Oscar"
---

Git hooks can be a very helpful tool in the development process. The hooks can listen for new commits and then give you the power of bash to do whatever really. In our case, it means that when there is a new commit to the master branch containing a new feature, we automate the deployment. It is pretty cool and makes deploying much easier and spares us quite some time and hassle. The most commonly used hook is *post-receive* and it is the one I will cover here. This hook is first called after the whole git process is completed before ending and can be used to update other services one might have.

More about the real-world scenario. For our current project we have a Node.js server for development and test purposes running on a Raspberry Pi. The same Pi also holds the Git repository. Instead of manually signing in to the Pi and building the project and starting the server we could make this process more time-saving by using the *post-receive* hook.

## The procedure in short
Firstly, set up a bare repository on your Raspberry Pi:

{% highlight bash %}
$ mkdir repos/myapp.git && cd repos/myapp.git
$ git init --bare
{% endhighlight %}

The ```--bare``` flag implies that the repository will not contain a working directory.

In the repository that was just created there is a folder named hooks/. Inside this folder is where the hook files will be placed.

{% highlight bash %}
$ cd hooks && touch post-recieve
$ sudo nano post-recieve
{% endhighlight %}

Here is where we write our bash script. In my case I will checkout the code and place it in the deploy directory. Using the npm package [forever](https://www.npmjs.com/package/forever) I will stop the currently running server, install new npm dependencies and run my build process. The last step in this process will start the app and keep it running.. FOREVER! Or, until I push my next feature. You will also notice that these commands are within an IF statement. I only want to deploy when pushing to the master branch. When developing, I use feature branches and commit quite often and I don't want to deploy features that are not complete.

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/bash
DEPLOYDIR=/home/pi/deploy-dir

while read oldrev newrev ref
do
    if [[ $ref =~ .*/master$ ]];
    then
        echo "Master ref received.  Deploying master branch to production..."

        # Checkout the code to the deployment directory
        git --work-tree="$DEPLOYDIR" --git-dir=/home/pi/repos/myapp.git checkout -f

        cd "$DEPLOYDIR"

        forever stop server/index.js

        # Install any new dependencies that might have been added
        npm install

        # Prepare my scripts for deployment
        npm run build

        forever start server/index.js

        echo "Master branch successfully deployd. Yay!"
    else
        echo "Ref $ref successfully received.  Doing nothing: only the master branch may be deployed on this server."
    fi
done
{% endhighlight %}

So the last words. Git hooks can be very useful and is very simple to setup. It is little work for quite a lot of satisfaction. At least it was for me when I was getting our service up for development. I hope this may serve as help to anyone other wanting to get started with basic Git hooks. Thanks for reading!
